<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 7</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-3" epub:type="part">
		<section id="chapter-3-2-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      VII.—JUNE TAKES A HAND
    </h2>
<p>
      One who was a sculptor, a Slav, a sometime resident in New York, an
      egoist, and impecunious, was to be found of an evening in June Forsyte's
      studio on the bank of the Thames at Chiswick. On the evening of July 6,
      Boris Strumolowski—several of whose works were on show there because
      they were as yet too advanced to be on show anywhere else—had begun
      well, with that aloof and rather Christ-like silence which admirably
      suited his youthful, round, broad cheek-boned countenance framed in bright
      hair banged like a girl's. June had known him three weeks, and he
      still seemed to her the principal embodiment of genius, and hope of the
      future; a sort of Star of the East which had strayed into an
      unappreciative West. Until that evening he had conversationally confined
      himself to recording his impressions of the United States, whose dust he
      had just shaken from off his feet—a country, in his opinion, so
      barbarous in every way that he had sold practically nothing there, and
      become an object of suspicion to the police; a country, as he said,
      without a race of its own, without liberty, equality, or fraternity,
      without principles, traditions, taste, without—in a word—a
      soul. He had left it for his own good, and come to the only other country
      where he could live well. June had dwelt unhappily on him in her lonely
      moments, standing before his creations—frightening, but powerful and
      symbolic once they had been explained! That he, haloed by bright hair like
      an early Italian painting, and absorbed in his genius to the exclusion of
      all else—the only sign of course by which real genius could be told—should
      still be a “lame duck” agitated her warm heart almost to the
      exclusion of Paul Post. And she had begun to take steps to clear her
      Gallery, in order to fill it with Strumolowski masterpieces. She had at
      once encountered trouble. Paul Post had kicked; Vospovitch had stung. With
      all the emphasis of a genius which she did not as yet deny them, they had
      demanded another six weeks at least of her Gallery. The American stream,
      still flowing in, would soon be flowing out. The American stream was their
      right, their only hope, their salvation—since nobody in this “beastly”
      country cared for Art. June had yielded to the demonstration. After all
      Boris would not mind their having the full benefit of an American stream,
      which he himself so violently despised.
    </p>
<p>
      This evening she had put that to Boris with nobody else present, except
      Hannah Hobdey, the mediaeval black-and-whitist, and Jimmy Portugal, editor
      of the Neo-Artist. She had put it to him with that sudden confidence which
      continual contact with the neo-artistic world had never been able to dry
      up in her warm and generous nature. He had not broken his Christ-like
      silence, however, for more than two minutes before she began to move her
      blue eyes from side to side, as a cat moves its tail. This—he said—was
      characteristic of England, the most selfish country in the world; the
      country which sucked the blood of other countries; destroyed the brains
      and hearts of Irishmen, Hindus, Egyptians, Boers, and Burmese, all the
      best races in the world; bullying, hypocritical England! This was what he
      had expected, coming to, such a country, where the climate was all fog,
      and the people all tradesmen perfectly blind to Art, and sunk in
      profiteering and the grossest materialism. Conscious that Hannah Hobdey
      was murmuring, “Hear, hear!” and Jimmy Portugal sniggering,
      June grew crimson, and suddenly rapped out:
    </p>
<p>
      “Then why did you ever come? We didn't ask you.”
    </p>
<p>
      The remark was so singularly at variance with all she had led him to
      expect from her, that Strumolowski stretched out his hand and took a
      cigarette.
    </p>
<p>
      “England never wants an idealist,” he said.
    </p>
<p>
      But in June something primitively English was thoroughly upset; old Jolyon's
      sense of justice had risen, as it were, from bed. “You come and
      sponge on us,” she said, “and then abuse us. If you think that's
      playing the game, I don't.”
    </p>
<p>
      She now discovered that which others had discovered before her—the
      thickness of hide beneath which the sensibility of genius is sometimes
      veiled. Strumolowski's young and ingenuous face became the
      incarnation of a sneer.
    </p>
<p>
      “Sponge, one does not sponge, one takes what is owing—a tenth
      part of what is owing. You will repent to say that, Miss Forsyte.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Oh, no,” said June, “I shan't.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Ah! We know very well, we artists—you take us to get what you
      can out of us. I want nothing from you”—and he blew out a
      cloud of June's smoke.
    </p>
<p>
      Decision rose in an icy puff from the turmoil of insulted shame within
      her. “Very well, then, you can take your things away.”
    </p>
<p>
      And, almost in the same moment, she thought: 'Poor boy! He's
      only got a garret, and probably not a taxi fare. In front of these people,
      too; it's positively disgusting!'
    </p>
<p>
      Young Strumolowski shook his head violently; his hair, thick, smooth,
      close as a golden plate, did not fall off.
    </p>
<p>
      “I can live on nothing,” he said shrilly; “I have often
      had to for the sake of my Art. It is you bourgeois who force us to spend
      money.”
    </p>
<p>
      The words hit June like a pebble, in the ribs. After all she had done for
      Art, all her identification with its troubles and lame ducks. She was
      struggling for adequate words when the door was opened, and her Austrian
      murmured:
    </p>
<p>
      “A young lady, gnadiges Fraulein.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Where?”
    </p>
<p>
      “In the little meal-room.”
    </p>
<p>
      With a glance at Boris Strumolowski, at Hannah Hobdey, at Jimmy Portugal,
      June said nothing, and went out, devoid of equanimity. Entering the
      “little meal-room,” she perceived the young lady to be Fleur—looking
      very pretty, if pale. At this disenchanted moment a little lame duck of
      her own breed was welcome to June, so homoeopathic by instinct.
    </p>
<p>
      The girl must have come, of course, because of Jon; or, if not, at least
      to get something out of her. And June felt just then that to assist
      somebody was the only bearable thing.
    </p>
<p>
      “So you've remembered to come,” she said.
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes. What a jolly little duck of a house! But please don't
      let me bother you, if you've got people.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Not at all,” said June. “I want to let them stew in
      their own juice for a bit. Have you come about Jon?”
    </p>
<p>
      “You said you thought we ought to be told. Well, I've found
      out.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Oh!” said June blankly. “Not nice, is it?”
    </p>
<p>
      They were standing one on each side of the little bare table at which June
      took her meals. A vase on it was full of Iceland poppies; the girl raised
      her hand and touched them with a gloved finger. To her new-fangled dress,
      frilly about the hips and tight below the knees, June took a sudden liking—a
      charming colour, flax-blue.
    </p>
<p>
      'She makes a picture,' thought June. Her little room, with its
      whitewashed walls, its floor and hearth of old pink brick, its black
      paint, and latticed window athwart which the last of the sunlight was
      shining, had never looked so charming, set off by this young figure, with
      the creamy, slightly frowning face. She remembered with sudden vividness
      how nice she herself had looked in those old days when her heart was set
      on Philip Bosinney, that dead lover, who had broken from her to destroy
      for ever Irene's allegiance to this girl's father. Did Fleur
      know of that, too?
    </p>
<p>
      “Well,” she said, “what are you going to do?”
    </p>
<p>
      It was some seconds before Fleur answered.
    </p>
<p>
      “I don't want Jon to suffer. I must see him once more to put
      an end to it.”
    </p>
<p>
      “You're going to put an end to it!”
    </p>
<p>
      “What else is there to do?”
    </p>
<p>
      The girl seemed to June, suddenly, intolerably spiritless.
    </p>
<p>
      “I suppose you're right,” she muttered. “I know my
      father thinks so; but—I should never have done it myself. I can't
      take things lying down.”
    </p>
<p>
      How poised and watchful that girl looked; how unemotional her voice
      sounded!
    </p>
<p>
      “People will assume that I'm in love.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, aren't you?”
    </p>
<p>
      Fleur shrugged her shoulders. 'I might have known it,' thought
      June; 'she's Soames' daughter—fish! And yet—he!'
    </p>
<p>
      “What do you want me to do then?” she said with a sort of
      disgust.
    </p>
<p>
      “Could I see Jon here to-morrow on his way down to Holly's? He'd
      come if you sent him a line to-night. And perhaps afterward you'd
      let them know quietly at Robin Hill that it's all over, and that
      they needn't tell Jon about his mother.”
    </p>
<p>
      “All right!” said June abruptly. “I'll write now,
      and you can post it. Half-past two tomorrow. I shan't be in, myself.”
    </p>
<p>
      She sat down at the tiny bureau which filled one corner. When she looked
      round with the finished note Fleur was still touching the poppies with her
      gloved finger.
    </p>
<p>
      June licked a stamp. “Well, here it is. If you're not in love,
      of course, there's no more to be said. Jon's lucky.”
    </p>
<p>
      Fleur took the note. “Thanks awfully!”
    </p>
<p>
      'Cold-blooded little baggage!' thought June. Jon, son of her
      father, to love, and not to be loved by the daughter of—Soames! It
      was humiliating!
    </p>
<p>
      “Is that all?”
    </p>
<p>
      Fleur nodded; her frills shook and trembled as she swayed toward the door.
    </p>
<p>
      “Good-bye!”
    </p>
<p>
      “Good-bye!... Little piece of fashion!” muttered June, closing
      the door. “That family!” And she marched back toward her
      studio. Boris Strumolowski had regained his Christ-like silence and Jimmy
      Portugal was damning everybody, except the group in whose behalf he ran
      the Neo-Artist. Among the condemned were Eric Cobbley, and several other
      “lame-duck” genii who at one time or another had held first
      place in the repertoire of June's aid and adoration. She experienced
      a sense of futility and disgust, and went to the window to let the
      river-wind blow those squeaky words away.
    </p>
<p>
      But when at length Jimmy Portugal had finished, and gone with Hannah
      Hobdey, she sat down and mothered young Strumolowski for half an hour,
      promising him a month, at least, of the American stream; so that he went
      away with his halo in perfect order. 'In spite of all,' June
      thought, 'Boris is wonderful.'
    </p>
<p>
<a id="link2H_4_0117" name="link2H_4_0117">
<!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
		</section>
	</section>
	</body>
	</html>
