<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 2</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-3" epub:type="part">
		<section id="chapter-3-3-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      II.—CONFESSION
    </h2>
<p>
      Late that same afternoon, Jolyon had a nap in the old armchair. Face down
      on his knee was La Rotisserie de la Refine Pedauque, and just before he
      fell asleep he had been thinking: 'As a people shall we ever really
      like the French? Will they ever really like us!' He himself had
      always liked the French, feeling at home with their wit, their taste,
      their cooking. Irene and he had paid many visits to France before the War,
      when Jon had been at his private school. His romance with her had begun in
      Paris—his last and most enduring romance. But the French—no
      Englishman could like them who could not see them in some sort with the
      detached aesthetic eye! And with that melancholy conclusion he had nodded
      off.
    </p>
<p>
      When he woke he saw Jon standing between him and the window. The boy had
      evidently come in from the garden and was waiting for him to wake. Jolyon
      smiled, still half asleep. How nice the chap looked—sensitive,
      affectionate, straight! Then his heart gave a nasty jump; and a quaking
      sensation overcame him. Jon! That confession! He controlled himself with
      an effort. “Why, Jon, where did you spring from?”
    </p>
<p>
      Jon bent over and kissed his forehead.
    </p>
<p>
      Only then he noticed the look on the boy's face.
    </p>
<p>
      “I came home to tell you something, Dad.”
    </p>
<p>
      With all his might Jolyon tried to get the better of the jumping, gurgling
      sensations within his chest.
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, sit down, old man. Have you seen your mother?”
    </p>
<p>
      “No.” The boy's flushed look gave place to pallor; he
      sat down on the arm of the old chair, as, in old days, Jolyon himself used
      to sit beside his own father, installed in its recesses. Right up to the
      time of the rupture in their relations he had been wont to perch there—had
      he now reached such a moment with his own son? All his life he had hated
      scenes like poison, avoided rows, gone on his own way quietly and let
      others go on theirs. But now—it seemed—at the very end of
      things, he had a scene before him more painful than any he had avoided. He
      drew a visor down over his emotion, and waited for his son to speak.
    </p>
<p>
      “Father,” said Jon slowly, “Fleur and I are engaged.”
    </p>
<p>
      'Exactly!' thought Jolyon, breathing with difficulty.
    </p>
<p>
      “I know that you and Mother don't like the idea. Fleur says
      that Mother was engaged to her father before you married her. Of course I
      don't know what happened, but it must be ages ago. I'm devoted
      to her, Dad, and she says she is to me.”
    </p>
<p>
      Jolyon uttered a queer sound, half laugh, half groan.
    </p>
<p>
      “You are nineteen, Jon, and I am seventy-two. How are we to
      understand each other in a matter like this, eh?”
    </p>
<p>
      “You love Mother, Dad; you must know what we feel. It isn't
      fair to us to let old things spoil our happiness, is it?”
    </p>
<p>
      Brought face to face with his confession, Jolyon resolved to do without it
      if by any means he could. He laid his hand on the boy's arm.
    </p>
<p>
      “Look, Jon! I might put you off with talk about your both being too
      young and not knowing your own minds, and all that, but you wouldn't
      listen, besides, it doesn't meet the case—Youth,
      unfortunately, cures itself. You talk lightly about 'old things like
      that,' knowing nothing—as you say truly—of what
      happened. Now, have I ever given you reason to doubt my love for you, or
      my word?”
    </p>
<p>
      At a less anxious moment he might have been amused by the conflict his
      words aroused—the boy's eager clasp, to reassure him on these
      points, the dread on his face of what that reassurance would bring forth;
      but he could only feel grateful for the squeeze.
    </p>
<p>
      “Very well, you can believe what I tell you. If you don't give
      up this love affair, you will make Mother wretched to the end of her days.
      Believe me, my dear, the past, whatever it was, can't be buried—it
      can't indeed.”
    </p>
<p>
      Jon got off the arm of the chair.
    </p>
<p>
      'The girl'—thought Jolyon—'there she goes—starting
      up before him—life itself—eager, pretty, loving!'
    </p>
<p>
      “I can't, Father; how can I—just because you say that?
      Of course, I can't!”
    </p>
<p>
      “Jon, if you knew the story you would give this up without
      hesitation; you would have to! Can't you believe me?”
    </p>
<p>
      “How can you tell what I should think? Father, I love her better
      than anything in the world.”
    </p>
<p>
      Jolyon's face twitched, and he said with painful slowness:
    </p>
<p>
      “Better than your mother, Jon?”
    </p>
<p>
      From the boy's face, and his clenched fists Jolyon realised the
      stress and struggle he was going through.
    </p>
<p>
      “I don't know,” he burst out, “I don't know!
      But to give Fleur up for nothing—for something I don't
      understand, for something that I don't believe can really matter
      half so much, will make me—make me....”
    </p>
<p>
      “Make you feel us unjust, put a barrier—yes. But that's
      better than going on with this.”
    </p>
<p>
      “I can't. Fleur loves me, and I love her. You want me to trust
      you; why don't you trust me, Father? We wouldn't want to know
      anything—we wouldn't let it make any difference. It'll
      only make us both love you and Mother all the more.”
    </p>
<p>
      Jolyon put his hand into his breast pocket, but brought it out again
      empty, and sat, clucking his tongue against his teeth.
    </p>
<p>
      “Think what your mother's been to you, Jon! She has nothing
      but you; I shan't last much longer.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Why not? It isn't fair to—Why not?”
    </p>
<p>
      “Well,” said Jolyon, rather coldly, “because the doctors
      tell me I shan't; that's all.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Oh, Dad!” cried Jon, and burst into tears.
    </p>
<p>
      This downbreak of his son, whom he had not seen cry since he was ten,
      moved Jolyon terribly. He recognised to the full how fearfully soft the
      boy's heart was, how much he would suffer in this business, and in
      life generally. And he reached out his hand helplessly—not wishing,
      indeed not daring to get up.
    </p>
<p>
      “Dear man,” he said, “don't—or you'll
      make me!”
    </p>
<p>
      Jon smothered down his paroxysm, and stood with face averted, very still.
    </p>
<p>
      'What now?' thought Jolyon. 'What can I say to move him?'
    </p>
<p>
      “By the way, don't speak of that to Mother,” he said;
      “she has enough to frighten her with this affair of yours. I know
      how you feel. But, Jon, you know her and me well enough to be sure we
      wouldn't wish to spoil your happiness lightly. Why, my dear boy, we
      don't care for anything but your happiness—at least, with me
      it's just yours and Mother's and with her just yours. It's
      all the future for you both that's at stake.”
    </p>
<p>
      Jon turned. His face was deadly pale; his eyes, deep in his head, seemed
      to burn.
    </p>
<p>
      “What is it? What is it? Don't keep me like this!”
    </p>
<p>
      Jolyon, who knew that he was beaten, thrust his hand again into his breast
      pocket, and sat for a full minute, breathing with difficulty, his eyes
      closed. The thought passed through his mind: 'I've had a good
      long innings—some pretty bitter moments—this is the worst!'
      Then he brought his hand out with the letter, and said with a sort of
      fatigue: “Well, Jon, if you hadn't come to-day, I was going to
      send you this. I wanted to spare you—I wanted to spare your mother
      and myself, but I see it's no good. Read it, and I think I'll
      go into the garden.” He reached forward to get up.
    </p>
<p>
      Jon, who had taken the letter, said quickly, “No, I'll go”;
      and was gone.
    </p>
<p>
      Jolyon sank back in his chair. A blue-bottle chose that moment to come
      buzzing round him with a sort of fury; the sound was homely, better than
      nothing.... Where had the boy gone to read his letter? The wretched letter—the
      wretched story! A cruel business—cruel to her—to Soames—to
      those two children—to himself!... His heart thumped and pained him.
      Life—its loves—its work—its beauty—its aching, and—its
      end! A good time; a fine time in spite of all; until—you regretted
      that you had ever been born. Life—it wore you down, yet did not make
      you want to die—that was the cunning evil! Mistake to have a heart!
      Again the blue-bottle came buzzing—bringing in all the heat and hum
      and scent of summer—yes, even the scent—as of ripe fruits,
      dried grasses, sappy shrubs, and the vanilla breath of cows. And out there
      somewhere in the fragrance Jon would be reading that letter, turning and
      twisting its pages in his trouble, his bewilderment and trouble—breaking
      his heart about it! The thought made Jolyon acutely miserable. Jon was
      such a tender-hearted chap, affectionate to his bones, and conscientious,
      too—it was so unfair, so damned unfair! He remembered Irene saying
      to him once: “Never was any one born more loving and lovable than
      Jon.” Poor little Jon! His world gone up the spout, all of a summer
      afternoon! Youth took things so hard! And stirred, tormented by that
      vision of Youth taking things hard, Jolyon got out of his chair, and went
      to the window. The boy was nowhere visible. And he passed out. If one
      could take any help to him now—one must!
    </p>
<p>
      He traversed the shrubbery, glanced into the walled garden—no Jon!
      Nor where the peaches and the apricots were beginning to swell and colour.
      He passed the Cupressus trees, dark and spiral, into the meadow. Where had
      the boy got to? Had he rushed down to the coppice—his old
      hunting-ground? Jolyon crossed the rows of hay. They would cock it on
      Monday and be carrying the day after, if rain held off. Often they had
      crossed this field together—hand in hand, when Jon was a little
      chap. Dash it! The golden age was over by the time one was ten! He came to
      the pond, where flies and gnats were dancing over a bright reedy surface;
      and on into the coppice. It was cool there, fragrant of larches. Still no
      Jon! He called. No answer! On the log seat he sat down, nervous, anxious,
      forgetting his own physical sensations. He had been wrong to let the boy
      get away with that letter; he ought to have kept him under his eye from
      the start! Greatly troubled, he got up to retrace his steps. At the
      farm-buildings he called again, and looked into the dark cow-house. There
      in the cool, and the scent of vanilla and ammonia, away from flies, the
      three Alderneys were chewing the quiet cud; just milked, waiting for
      evening, to be turned out again into the lower field. One turned a lazy
      head, a lustrous eye; Jolyon could see the slobber on its grey lower lip.
      He saw everything with passionate clearness, in the agitation of his
      nerves—all that in his time he had adored and tried to paint—wonder
      of light and shade and colour. No wonder the legend put Christ into a
      manger—what more devotional than the eyes and moon-white horns of a
      chewing cow in the warm dusk! He called again. No answer! And he hurried
      away out of the coppice, past the pond, up the hill. Oddly ironical—now
      he came to think of it—if Jon had taken the gruel of his discovery
      down in the coppice where his mother and Bosinney in those old days had
      made the plunge of acknowledging their love. Where he himself, on the log
      seat the Sunday morning he came back from Paris, had realised to the full
      that Irene had become the world to him. That would have been the place for
      Irony to tear the veil from before the eyes of Irene's boy! But he
      was not here! Where had he got to? One must find the poor chap!
    </p>
<p>
      A gleam of sun had come, sharpening to his hurrying senses all the beauty
      of the afternoon, of the tall trees and lengthening shadows, of the blue,
      and the white clouds, the scent of the hay, and the cooing of the pigeons;
      and the flower shapes standing tall. He came to the rosery, and the beauty
      of the roses in that sudden sunlight seemed to him unearthly. “Rose,
      you Spaniard!” Wonderful three words! There she had stood by that
      bush of dark red roses; had stood to read and decide that Jon must know it
      all! He knew all now! Had she chosen wrong? He bent and sniffed a rose,
      its petals brushed his nose and trembling lips; nothing so soft as a
      rose-leaf's velvet, except her neck—Irene! On across the lawn
      he went, up the slope, to the oak-tree. Its top alone was glistening, for
      the sudden sun was away over the house; the lower shade was thick,
      blessedly cool—he was greatly overheated. He paused a minute with
      his hand on the rope of the swing—Jolly, Holly—Jon! The old
      swing! And suddenly, he felt horribly—deadly ill. 'I've
      over done it!' he thought: 'by Jove! I've overdone it—after
      all!' He staggered up toward the terrace, dragged himself up the
      steps, and fell against the wall of the house. He leaned there gasping,
      his face buried in the honey-suckle that he and she had taken such trouble
      with that it might sweeten the air which drifted in. Its fragrance mingled
      with awful pain. 'My love!' he thought; 'the boy!'
      And with a great effort he tottered in through the long window, and sank
      into old Jolyon's chair. The book was there, a pencil in it; he
      caught it up, scribbled a word on the open page.... His hand dropped....
      So it was like this—was it?...
    </p>
<p>
      There was a great wrench; and darkness....
    </p>
<p>
<a id="link2H_4_0124" name="link2H_4_0124">
<!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
		</section>
	</section>
	</body>
	</html>
