<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XI: The Last of the Old Forsytes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3-3" id="chapter-3-3-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h4 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h4>
				<p epub:type="title">The Last of the Old Forsytes</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>When they came to prepare that terrific symbol Timothy Forsyte‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe one pure individualist left, the only man who hadn‚Äôt heard of the Great War‚ÅÝ‚Äîthey found him wonderful‚ÅÝ‚Äînot even death had undermined his soundness.</p>
			<p>To Smither and Cook that preparation came like final evidence of what they had never believed possible‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe end of the old Forsyte family on earth. Poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝTimothy must now take a harp and sing in the company of Miss Forsyte, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝJulia, Miss Hester; with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝJolyon, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSwithin, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝJames, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝRoger, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝNicholas of the party. Whether <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝHayman would be there was more doubtful, seeing that she had been cremated. Secretly Cook thought that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝTimothy would be upset‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe had always been so set against barrel organs. How many times had she not said: ‚ÄúDrat the thing! There it is again! Smither, you‚Äôd better run up and see what you can do.‚Äù And in her heart she would so have enjoyed the tunes, if she hadn‚Äôt known that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝTimothy would ring the bell in a minute and say: ‚ÄúHere, take him a halfpenny and tell him to move on.‚Äù Often they had been obliged to add threepence of their own before the man would go‚ÅÝ‚ÄîTimothy had ever underrated the value of emotion. Luckily he had taken the organs for bluebottles in his last years, which had been a comfort, and they had been able to enjoy the tunes. But a harp! Cook wondered. It <em>was</em> a change! And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝTimothy had never liked change. But she did not speak of this to Smither, who did so take a line of her own in regard to heaven that it quite put one about sometimes.</p>
			<p>She cried while Timothy was being prepared, and they all had sherry afterward out of the yearly Christmas bottle, which would not be needed now. Ah! dear! She had been there five-and-forty years and Smither three-and-forty! And now they would be going to a tiny house in Tooting, to live on their savings and what Miss Hester had so kindly left them‚ÅÝ‚Äîfor to take fresh service after the glorious past‚ÅÝ‚ÄîNo! But they <em>would</em> like just to see <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSoames again, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝDartie, and Miss Francie, and Miss Euphemia. And even if they had to take their own cab, they felt they must go to the funeral. For six years <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝTimothy had been their baby, getting younger and younger every day, till at last he had been too young to live.</p>
			<p>They spent the regulation hours of waiting in polishing and dusting, in catching the one mouse left, and asphyxiating the last beetle so as to leave it nice, discussing with each other what they would buy at the sale. Miss Ann‚Äôs workbox; Miss Juley‚Äôs (that is <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝJulia‚Äôs) seaweed album; the fire-screen Miss Hester had crewelled; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝTimothy‚Äôs hair‚ÅÝ‚Äîlittle golden curls, glued into a black frame. Oh! they must have those‚ÅÝ‚Äîonly the price of things had gone up so!</p>
			<p>It fell to Soames to issue invitations for the funeral. He had them drawn up by Gradman in his office‚ÅÝ‚Äîonly blood relations, and no flowers. Six carriages were ordered. The will would be read afterward at the house.</p>
			<p>He arrived at eleven o‚Äôclock to see that all was ready. At a quarter past old Gradman came in black gloves and crape on his hat. He and Soames stood in the drawing-room waiting. At half-past eleven the carriages drew up in a long row. But no one else appeared. Gradman said:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúIt surprises me, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSoames. I posted them myself.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúI don‚Äôt know,‚Äù said Soames; ‚Äúhe‚Äôd lost touch with the family.‚Äù Soames had often noticed in old days how much more neighbourly his family were to the dead than to the living. But, now, the way they had flocked to Fleur‚Äôs wedding and abstained from Timothy‚Äôs funeral, seemed to show some vital change. There might, of course, be another reason; for Soames felt that if he had not known the contents of Timothy‚Äôs will, he might have stayed away himself through delicacy. Timothy had left a lot of money, with nobody in particular to leave it to. They mightn‚Äôt like to seem to expect something.</p>
			<p>At twelve o‚Äôclock the procession left the door; Timothy alone in the first carriage under glass. Then Soames alone; then Gradman alone; then Cook and Smither together. They started at a walk, but were soon trotting under a bright sky. At the entrance to Highgate Cemetery they were delayed by service in the Chapel. Soames would have liked to stay outside in the sunshine. He didn‚Äôt believe a word of it; on the other hand, it was a form of insurance which could not safely be neglected, in case there might be something in it after all.</p>
			<p>They walked up two and two‚ÅÝ‚Äîhe and Gradman, Cook and Smither‚ÅÝ‚Äîto the family vault. It was not very distinguished for the funeral of the last old Forsyte.</p>
			<p>He took Gradman into his carriage on the way back to the Bayswater Road with a certain glow in his heart. He had a surprise in pickle for the old chap who had served the Forsytes four-and-fifty years‚ÅÝ‚Äîa treat that was entirely his doing. How well he remembered saying to Timothy the day after Aunt Hester‚Äôs funeral: ‚ÄúWell, Uncle Timothy, there‚Äôs Gradman. He‚Äôs taken a lot of trouble for the family. What do you say to leaving him five thousand?‚Äù and his surprise, seeing the difficulty there had been in getting Timothy to leave anything, when Timothy had nodded. And now the old chap would be as pleased as Punch, for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr>¬ÝGradman, he knew, had a weak heart, and their son had lost a leg in the War. It was extraordinarily gratifying to Soames to have left him five thousand pounds of Timothy‚Äôs money. They sat down together in the little drawing-room, whose walls‚ÅÝ‚Äîlike a vision of heaven‚ÅÝ‚Äîwere sky-blue and gold with every picture-frame unnaturally bright, and every speck of dust removed from every piece of furniture, to read that little masterpiece‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe will of Timothy. With his back to the light in Aunt Hester‚Äôs chair, Soames faced Gradman with his face to the light, on Aunt Ann‚Äôs sofa; and, crossing his legs, began:</p>
			<p>‚ÄúThis is the last will and testament of me Timothy Forsyte of The Bower Bayswater Road London I appoint my nephew Soames Forsyte of the Shelter Mapleduram and Thomas Gradman of 159 Folly Road Highgate (hereinafter called my Trustees) to be the trustees and executors of this my will. To the said Soames Forsyte I leave the sum of one thousand pounds free of legacy duty and to the said Thomas Gradman I leave the sum of five thousand pounds free of legacy duty.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Soames paused. Old Gradman was leaning forward, convulsively gripping a stout black knee with each of his thick hands; his mouth had fallen open so that the gold fillings of three teeth gleamed; his eyes were blinking, two tears rolled slowly out of them. Soames read hastily on.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAll the rest of my property of whatsoever description I bequeath to my Trustees upon Trust to convert and hold the same upon the following trusts namely: To pay thereout all my debts funeral expenses and outgoings of any kind in connection with my will and to hold the residue thereof in trust for that male lineal descendant of my father Jolyon Forsyte by his marriage with Ann Pierce who after the decease of all lineal descendants whether male or female of my said father by his said marriage in being at the time of my death shall last attain the age of twenty-one years absolutely it being my desire that my property shall be nursed to the extreme limit permitted by the laws of England for the benefit of such male lineal descendant as aforesaid.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Soames read the investment and attestation clauses, and, ceasing, looked at Gradman. The old fellow was wiping his brow with a large handkerchief, whose brilliant colour supplied a sudden festive tinge to the proceedings.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúMy word, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝSoames!‚Äù he said, and it was clear that the lawyer in him had utterly wiped out the man: ‚ÄúMy word! Why, there are two babies now, and some quite young children‚ÅÝ‚Äîif one of them lives to be eighty‚ÅÝ‚Äîit‚Äôs not a great age‚ÅÝ‚Äîand add twenty-one‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat‚Äôs a hundred years; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝTimothy worth a hundred and fifty thousand pound net if he‚Äôs worth a penny. Compound interest at five percent doubles you in fourteen years. In fourteen years three hundred thousand‚Äîsix hundred thousand in twenty-eight‚ÅÝ‚Äîtwelve hundred thousand in forty-two‚ÅÝ‚Äîtwenty-four hundred thousand in fifty-six‚ÅÝ‚Äîfour million eight hundred thousand in seventy‚ÅÝ‚Äînine million six hundred thousand in eighty-four‚ÅÝ‚ÄîWhy, in a hundred years it‚Äôll be twenty million! And we shan‚Äôt live to use it! It <em>is</em> a will!‚Äù</p>
			<p>Soames said dryly: ‚ÄúAnything may happen. The State might take the lot; they‚Äôre capable of anything in these days.‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúAnd carry five,‚Äù said Gradman to himself. ‚ÄúI forgot‚ÅÝ‚Äî<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr>¬ÝTimothy‚Äôs in Consols; we shan‚Äôt get more than two percent with this income tax. To be on the safe side, say eight millions. Still, that‚Äôs a pretty penny.‚Äù</p>
			<p>Soames rose and handed him the will. ‚ÄúYou‚Äôre going into the City. Take care of that, and do what‚Äôs necessary. Advertise; but there are no debts. When‚Äôs the sale?‚Äù</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTuesday week,‚Äù said Gradman. ‚ÄúLife or lives in bein‚Äô and twenty-one years afterward‚ÅÝ‚Äîit‚Äôs a long way off. But I‚Äôm glad he‚Äôs left it in the family.‚ÅÝ‚Ää‚ÅÝ‚Ä¶‚Äù</p>
			<p>The sale‚ÅÝ‚Äînot at Jobson‚Äôs, in view of the Victorian nature of the effects‚ÅÝ‚Äîwas far more freely attended than the funeral, though not by Cook and Smither, for Soames had taken it on himself to give them their heart‚Äôs desires. Winifred was present, Euphemia, and Francie, and Eustace had come in his car. The miniatures, Barbizons, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. R.</abbr> drawings had been bought in by Soames; and relics of no marketable value were set aside in an off-room for members of the family who cared to have mementoes. These were the only restrictions upon bidding characterised by an almost tragic languor. Not one piece of furniture, no picture or porcelain figure appealed to modern taste. The humming birds had fallen like autumn leaves when taken from where they had not hummed for sixty years. It was painful to Soames to see the chairs his aunts had sat on, the little grand piano they had practically never played, the books whose outsides they had gazed at, the china they had dusted, the curtains they had drawn, the hearthrug which had warmed their feet; above all, the beds they had lain and died in‚ÅÝ‚Äîsold to little dealers, and the housewives of Fulham. And yet‚ÅÝ‚Äîwhat could one do? Buy them and stick them in a lumber-room? No; they had to go the way of all flesh and furniture, and be worn out. But when they put up Aunt Ann‚Äôs sofa and were going to knock it down for thirty shillings, he cried out, suddenly: ‚ÄúFive pounds!‚Äù The sensation was considerable, and the sofa his.</p>
			<p>When that little sale was over in the fusty saleroom, and those Victorian ashes scattered, he went out into the misty October sunshine feeling as if cosiness had died out of the world, and the board ‚ÄúTo Let‚Äù was up, indeed. Revolutions on the horizon; Fleur in Spain; no comfort in Annette; no Timothy‚Äôs on the Bayswater Road. In the irritable desolation of his soul he went into the Goupenor Gallery. That chap Jolyon‚Äôs watercolours were on view there. He went in to look down his nose at them‚ÅÝ‚Äîit might give him some faint satisfaction. The news had trickled through from June to Val‚Äôs wife, from her to Val, from Val to his mother, from her to Soames, that the house‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe fatal house at Robin Hill‚ÅÝ‚Äîwas for sale, and Irene going to join her boy out in British Columbia, or some such place. For one wild moment the thought had come to Soames: ‚ÄúWhy shouldn‚Äôt I buy it back? I meant it for my‚ÅÝ‚Äî!‚Äù No sooner come than gone. Too lugubrious a triumph; with too many humiliating memories for himself and Fleur. She would never live there after what had happened. No, the place must go its way to some peer or profiteer. It had been a bone of contention from the first, the shell of the feud; and with the woman gone, it was an empty shell. ‚ÄúFor Sale or To Let.‚Äù With his mind‚Äôs eye he could see that board raised high above the ivied wall which he had built.</p>
			<p>He passed through the first of the two rooms in the Gallery. There was certainly a body of work! And now that the fellow was dead it did not seem so trivial. The drawings were pleasing enough, with quite a sense of atmosphere, and something individual in the brush work. ‚ÄúHis father and my father; he and I; his child and mine!‚Äù thought Soames. So it had gone on! And all about that woman! Softened by the events of the past week, affected by the melancholy beauty of the autumn day, Soames came nearer than he had ever been to realisation of that truth‚ÅÝ‚Äîpassing the understanding of a Forsyte pure‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat the body of Beauty has a spiritual essence, uncapturable save by a devotion which thinks not of self. After all, he was near that truth in his devotion to his daughter; perhaps that made him understand a little how he had missed the prize. And there, among the drawings of his kinsman, who had attained to that which he had found beyond his reach, he thought of him and her with a tolerance which surprised him. But he did not buy a drawing.</p>
			<p>Just as he passed the seat of custom on his return to the outer air he met with a contingency which had not been entirely absent from his mind when he went into the Gallery‚ÅÝ‚ÄîIrene, herself, coming in. So she had not gone yet, and was still paying farewell visits to that fellow‚Äôs remains! He subdued the little involuntary leap of his subconsciousness, the mechanical reaction of his senses to the charm of this once-owned woman, and passed her with averted eyes. But when he had gone by he could not for the life of him help looking back. This, then, was finality‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe heat and stress of his life, the madness and the longing thereof, the only defeat he had known, would be over when she faded from his view this time; even such memories had their own queer aching value.</p>
			<p>She, too, was looking back. Suddenly she lifted her gloved hand, her lips smiled faintly, her dark eyes seemed to speak. It was the turn of Soames to make no answer to that smile and that little farewell wave; he went out into the fashionable street quivering from head to foot. He knew what she had meant to say: ‚ÄúNow that I am going forever out of the reach of you and yours‚ÅÝ‚Äîforgive me; I wish you well.‚Äù That was the meaning; last sign of that terrible reality‚ÅÝ‚Äîpassing morality, duty, common sense‚ÅÝ‚Äîher aversion from him who had owned her body, but had never touched her spirit or her heart. It hurt; yes‚ÅÝ‚Äîmore than if she had kept her mask unmoved, her hand unlifted.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Three days later, in that fast-yellowing October, Soames took a taxicab to Highgate Cemetery and mounted through its white forest to the Forsyte vault. Close to the cedar, above catacombs and columbaria, tall, ugly, and individual, it looked like an apex of the competitive system. He could remember a discussion wherein Swithin had advocated the addition to its face of the pheasant proper. The proposal had been rejected in favour of a wreath in stone, above the stark words: ‚ÄúThe family vault of Jolyon Forsyte: 1850.‚Äù It was in good order. All trace of the recent interment had been removed, and its sober grey gloomed reposefully in the sunshine. The whole family lay there now, except old Jolyon‚Äôs wife, who had gone back under a contract to her own family vault in Suffolk; old Jolyon himself lying at Robin Hill; and Susan Hayman, cremated so that none knew where she might be. Soames gazed at it with satisfaction‚ÅÝ‚Äîmassive, needing little attention; and this was important, for he was well aware that no one would attend to it when he himself was gone, and he would have to be looking out for lodgings soon. He might have twenty years before him, but one never knew. Twenty years without an aunt or uncle, with a wife of whom one had better not know anything, with a daughter gone from home. His mood inclined to melancholy and retrospection.</p>
			<p>This cemetery was full, they said‚ÅÝ‚Äîof people with extraordinary names, buried in extraordinary taste. Still, they had a fine view up here, right over London. Annette had once given him a story to read by that Frenchman, Maupassant, most lugubrious concern, where all the skeletons emerged from their graves one night, and all the pious inscriptions on the stones were altered to descriptions of their sins. Not a true story at all. He didn‚Äôt know about the French, but there was not much real harm in English people except their teeth and their taste, which was certainly deplorable. ‚ÄúThe family vault of Jolyon Forsyte: 1850.‚Äù A lot of people had been buried here since then‚ÅÝ‚Äîa lot of English life crumbled to mould and dust! The boom of an airplane passing under the gold-tinted clouds caused him to lift his eyes. The deuce of a lot of expansion had gone on. But it all came back to a cemetery‚ÅÝ‚Äîto a name and a date on a tomb. And he thought with a curious pride that he and his family had done little or nothing to help this feverish expansion. Good solid middlemen, they had gone to work with dignity to manage and possess. Superior Dosset, indeed, had built in a dreadful, and Jolyon painted in a doubtful, period, but so far as he remembered not another of them all had soiled his hands by creating anything‚ÅÝ‚Äîunless you counted Val Dartie and his horse-breeding. Collectors, solicitors, barristers, merchants, publishers, accountants, directors, land agents, even soldiers‚ÅÝ‚Äîthere they had been! The country had expanded, as it were, in spite of them. They had checked, controlled, defended, and taken advantage of the process and when you considered how Superior Dosset had begun life with next to nothing, and his lineal descendants already owned what old Gradman estimated at between a million and a million and a half, it was not so bad! And yet he sometimes felt as if the family bolt was shot, their possessive instinct dying out. They seemed unable to make money‚ÅÝ‚Äîthis fourth generation; they were going into art, literature, farming, or the army; or just living on what was left them‚ÅÝ‚Äîthey had no push and no tenacity. They would die out if they didn‚Äôt take care.</p>
			<p>Soames turned from the vault and faced toward the breeze. The air up here would be delicious if only he could rid his nerves of the feeling that mortality was in it. He gazed restlessly at the crosses and the urns, the angels, the ‚Äúimmortelles,‚Äù the flowers, gaudy or withering; and suddenly he noticed a spot which seemed so different from anything else up there that he was obliged to walk the few necessary yards and look at it. A sober corner, with a massive queer-shaped cross of grey rough-hewn granite, guarded by four dark yew-trees. The spot was free from the pressure of the other graves, having a little box-hedged garden on the far side, and in front a goldening birch-tree. This oasis in the desert of conventional graves appealed to the aesthetic sense of Soames, and he sat down there in the sunshine. Through those trembling gold birch leaves he gazed out at London, and yielded to the waves of memory. He thought of Irene in Montpellier Square, when her hair was rusty-golden and her white shoulders his‚ÅÝ‚ÄîIrene, the prize of his love-passion, resistant to his ownership. He saw Bosinney‚Äôs body lying in that white mortuary, and Irene sitting on the sofa looking at space with the eyes of a dying bird. Again he thought of her by the little green Niobe in the Bois de Boulogne, once more rejecting him. His fancy took him on beside his drifting river on the November day when Fleur was to be born, took him to the dead leaves floating on the green-tinged water and the snake-headed weed forever swaying and nosing, sinuous, blind, tethered. And on again to the window opened to the cold starry night above Hyde Park, with his father lying dead. His fancy darted to that picture of ‚Äúthe future town,‚Äù to that boy‚Äôs and Fleur‚Äôs first meeting; to the bluish trail of Prosper Profond‚Äôs cigar, and Fleur in the window pointing down to where the fellow prowled. To the sight of Irene and that dead fellow sitting side by side in the stand at Lord‚Äôs. To her and that boy at Robin Hill. To the sofa, where Fleur lay crushed up in the corner; to her lips pressed into his cheek, and her farewell ‚ÄúDaddy.‚Äù And suddenly he saw again Irene‚Äôs grey-gloved hand waving its last gesture of release.</p>
			<p>He sat there a long time dreaming his career, faithful to the scut of his possessive instinct, warming himself even with its failures.</p>
			<p>‚ÄúTo Let‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe Forsyte age and way of life, when a man owned his soul, his investments, and his woman, without check or question. And now the State had, or would have, his investments, his woman had herself, and God knew who had his soul. ‚ÄúTo Let‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîthat sane and simple creed!</p>
			<p>The waters of change were foaming in, carrying the promise of new forms only when their destructive flood should have passed its full. He sat there, subconscious of them, but with his thoughts resolutely set on the past‚ÅÝ‚Äîas a man might ride into a wild night with his face to the tail of his galloping horse. Athwart the Victorian dykes the waters were rolling on property, manners, and morals, on melody and the old forms of art‚ÅÝ‚Äîwaters bringing to his mouth a salt taste as of blood, lapping to the foot of this Highgate Hill where Victorianism lay buried. And sitting there, high up on its most individual spot, Soames‚ÅÝ‚Äîlike a figure of Investment‚ÅÝ‚Äîrefused their restless sounds. Instinctively he would not fight them‚ÅÝ‚Äîthere was in him too much primeval wisdom, of Man the possessive animal. They would quiet down when they had fulfilled their tidal fever of dispossessing and destroying; when the creations and the properties of others were sufficiently broken and defected‚ÅÝ‚Äîthey would lapse and ebb, and fresh forms would rise based on an instinct older than the fever of change‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe instinct of Home.</p>
			<p>‚Äú<i xml:lang="fr">Je m‚Äôen fiche</i>,‚Äù said Prosper Profond. Soames did not say ‚Äú<i xml:lang="fr">Je m‚Äôen fiche</i>‚Äù‚ÅÝ‚Äîit was French, and the fellow was a thorn in his side‚ÅÝ‚Äîbut deep down he knew that change was only the interval of death between two forms of life, destruction necessary to make room for fresher property. What though the board was up, and cosiness to let?‚ÅÝ‚Äîsomeone would come along and take it again some day.</p>
			<p>And only one thing really troubled him, sitting there‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe melancholy craving in his heart‚ÅÝ‚Äîbecause the sun was like enchantment on his face and on the clouds and on the golden birch leaves, and the wind‚Äôs rustle was so gentle, and the yew-tree green so dark, and the sickle of a moon pale in the sky.</p>
			<p>He might wish and wish and never get it‚ÅÝ‚Äîthe beauty and the loving in the world!</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
