<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Chapter 4</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-3" epub:type="part">
		<section id="chapter-3-1-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
      IV.—THE MAUSOLEUM
    </h2>
<p>
      There are houses whose souls have passed into the limbo of Time, leaving
      their bodies in the limbo of London. Such was not quite the condition of
      “Timothy's” on the Bayswater Road, for Timothy's
      soul still had one foot in Timothy Forsyte's body, and Smither kept
      the atmosphere unchanging, of camphor and port wine and house whose
      windows are only opened to air it twice a day.
    </p>
<p>
      To Forsyte imagination that house was now a sort of Chinese pill-box, a
      series of layers in the last of which was Timothy. One did not reach him,
      or so it was reported by members of the family who, out of old-time habit
      or absentmindedness, would drive up once in a blue moon and ask after
      their surviving uncle. Such were Francie, now quite emancipated from God
      (she frankly avowed atheism), Euphemia, emancipated from old Nicholas, and
      Winifred Dartie from her “man of the world.” But, after all,
      everybody was emancipated now, or said they were—perhaps not quite
      the same thing!
    </p>
<p>
      When Soames, therefore, took it on his way to Paddington station on the
      morning after that encounter, it was hardly with the expectation of seeing
      Timothy in the flesh. His heart made a faint demonstration within him
      while he stood in full south sunlight on the newly whitened doorstep of
      that little house where four Forsytes had once lived, and now but one
      dwelt on like a winter fly; the house into which Soames had come and out
      of which he had gone times without number, divested of, or burdened with,
      fardels of family gossip; the house of the “old people” of
      another century, another age.
    </p>
<p>
      The sight of Smither—still corseted up to the armpits because the
      new fashion which came in as they were going out about 1903 had never been
      considered “nice” by Aunts Juley and Hester—brought a
      pale friendliness to Soames' lips; Smither, still faithfully
      arranged to old pattern in every detail, an invaluable servant—none
      such left—smiling back at him, with the words: “Why! it's
      Mr. Soames, after all this time! And how are you, sir? Mr. Timothy will be
      so pleased to know you've been.”
    </p>
<p>
      “How is he?”
    </p>
<p>
      “Oh! he keeps fairly bobbish for his age, sir; but of course he's
      a wonderful man. As I said to Mrs. Dartie when she was here last: It would
      please Miss Forsyte and Mrs. Juley and Miss Hester to see how he relishes
      a baked apple still. But he's quite deaf. And a mercy, I always
      think. For what we should have done with him in the air-raids, I don't
      know.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Ah!” said Soames. “What did you do with him?”
    </p>
<p>
      “We just left him in his bed, and had the bell run down into the
      cellar, so that Cook and I could hear him if he rang. It would never have
      done to let him know there was a war on. As I said to Cook, 'If Mr.
      Timothy rings, they may do what they like—I'm going up. My
      dear mistresses would have a fit if they could see him ringing and nobody
      going to him.' But he slept through them all beautiful. And the one
      in the daytime he was having his bath. It was a mercy, because he might
      have noticed the people in the street all looking up—he often looks
      out of the window.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Quite!” murmured Soames. Smither was getting garrulous!
      “I just want to look round and see if there's anything to be
      done.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, sir. I don't think there's anything except a smell
      of mice in the dining-room that we don't know how to get rid of. It's
      funny they should be there, and not a crumb, since Mr. Timothy took to not
      coming down, just before the War. But they're nasty little things;
      you never know where they'll take you next.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Does he leave his bed?”—
    </p>
<p>
      “Oh! yes, sir; he takes nice exercise between his bed and the window
      in the morning, not to risk a change of air. And he's quite
      comfortable in himself; has his Will out every day regular. It's a
      great consolation to him—that.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Well, Smither, I want to see him, if I can; in case he has anything
      to say to me.”
    </p>
<p>
      Smither coloured up above her corsets.
    </p>
<p>
      “It will be an occasion!” she said. “Shall I take you
      round the house, sir, while I send Cook to break it to him?”
    </p>
<p>
      “No, you go to him,” said Soames. “I can go round the
      house by myself.”
    </p>
<p>
      One could not confess to sentiment before another, and Soames felt that he
      was going to be sentimental nosing round those rooms so saturated with the
      past. When Smither, creaking with excitement, had left him, Soames entered
      the dining-room and sniffed. In his opinion it wasn't mice, but
      incipient wood-rot, and he examined the panelling. Whether it was worth a
      coat of paint, at Timothy's age, he was not sure. The room had
      always been the most modern in the house; and only a faint smile curled
      Soames' lips and nostrils. Walls of a rich green surmounted the oak
      dado; a heavy metal chandelier hung by a chain from a ceiling divided by
      imitation beams. The pictures had been bought by Timothy, a bargain, one
      day at Jobson's sixty years ago—three Snyder “still
      lifes,” two faintly coloured drawings of a boy and a girl, rather
      charming, which bore the initials “J. R.”—Timothy had
      always believed they might turn out to be Joshua Reynolds, but Soames, who
      admired them, had discovered that they were only John Robinson; and a
      doubtful Morland of a white pony being shod. Deep-red plush curtains, ten
      high-backed dark mahogany chairs with deep-red plush seats, a Turkey
      carpet, and a mahogany dining-table as large as the room was small, such
      was an apartment which Soames could remember unchanged in soul or body
      since he was four years old. He looked especially at the two drawings, and
      thought: 'I shall buy those at the sale.'
    </p>
<p>
      From the dining-room he passed into Timothy's study. He did not
      remember ever having been in that room. It was lined from floor to ceiling
      with volumes, and he looked at them with curiosity. One wall seemed
      devoted to educational books, which Timothy's firm had published two
      generations back-sometimes as many as twenty copies of one book. Soames
      read their titles and shuddered. The middle wall had precisely the same
      books as used to be in the library at his own father's in Park Lane,
      from which he deduced the fancy that James and his youngest brother had
      gone out together one day and bought a brace of small libraries. The third
      wall he approached with more excitement. Here, surely, Timothy's own
      taste would be found. It was. The books were dummies. The fourth wall was
      all heavily curtained window. And turned toward it was a large chair with
      a mahogany reading-stand attached, on which a yellowish and folded copy of
      The Times, dated July 6, 1914, the day Timothy first failed to come down,
      as if in preparation for the War, seemed waiting for him still. In a
      corner stood a large globe of that world never visited by Timothy, deeply
      convinced of the unreality of everything but England, and permanently
      upset by the sea, on which he had been very sick one Sunday afternoon in
      1836, out of a pleasure boat off the pier at Brighton, with Juley and
      Hester, Swithin and Hatty Chessman; all due to Swithin, who was always
      taking things into his head, and who, thank goodness, had been sick too.
      Soames knew all about it, having heard the tale fifty times at least from
      one or other of them. He went up to the globe, and gave it a spin; it
      emitted a faint creak and moved about an inch, bringing into his purview a
      daddy-long-legs which had died on it in latitude 44.
    </p>
<p>
      'Mausoleum!' he thought. 'George was right!' And
      he went out and up the stairs. On the half-landing he stopped before the
      case of stuffed humming-birds which had delighted his childhood. They
      looked not a day older, suspended on wires above pampas-grass. If the case
      were opened the birds would not begin to hum, but the whole thing would
      crumble, he suspected. It wouldn't be worth putting that into the
      sale! And suddenly he was caught by a memory of Aunt Ann—dear old
      Aunt Ann—holding him by the hand in front of that case and saying:
      “Look, Soamey! Aren't they bright and pretty, dear little
      humming-birds!” Soames remembered his own answer: “They don't
      hum, Auntie.” He must have been six, in a black velveteen suit with
      a light-blue collar-he remembered that suit well! Aunt Ann with her
      ringlets, and her spidery kind hands, and her grave old aquiline smile—a
      fine old lady, Aunt Ann! He moved on up to the drawing-room door. There on
      each side of it were the groups of miniatures. Those he would certainly
      buy in! The miniatures of his four aunts, one of his Uncle Swithin
      adolescent, and one of his Uncle Nicholas as a boy. They had all been
      painted by a young lady friend of the family at a time, 1830, about, when
      miniatures were considered very genteel, and lasting too, painted as they
      were on ivory. Many a time had he heard the tale of that young lady:
      “Very talented, my dear; she had quite a weakness for Swithin, and
      very soon after she went into a consumption and died: so like Keats—we
      often spoke of it.”
    </p>
<p>
      Well, there they were! Ann, Juley, Hester, Susan—quite a small
      child; Swithin, with sky-blue eyes, pink cheeks, yellow curls, white
      waistcoat-large as life; and Nicholas, like Cupid with an eye on heaven.
      Now he came to think of it, Uncle Nick had always been rather like that—a
      wonderful man to the last. Yes, she must have had talent, and miniatures
      always had a certain back-watered cachet of their own, little subject to
      the currents of competition on aesthetic Change. Soames opened the
      drawing-room door. The room was dusted, the furniture uncovered, the
      curtains drawn back, precisely as if his aunts still dwelt there patiently
      waiting. And a thought came to him: When Timothy died—why not? Would
      it not be almost a duty to preserve this house—like Carlyle's—and
      put up a tablet, and show it? “Specimen of mid-Victorian abode—entrance,
      one shilling, with catalogue.” After all, it was the completest
      thing, and perhaps the deadest in the London of to-day. Perfect in its
      special taste and culture, if, that is, he took down and carried over to
      his own collection the four Barbizon pictures he had given them. The still
      sky-blue walls, tile green curtains patterned with red flowers and ferns;
      the crewel-worked fire-screen before the cast-iron grate; the mahogany
      cupboard with glass windows, full of little knickknacks; the beaded
      footstools; Keats, Shelley, Southey, Cowper, Coleridge, Byron's
      Corsair (but nothing else), and the Victorian poets in a bookshelf row;
      the marqueterie cabinet lined with dim red plush, full of family relics:
      Hester's first fan; the buckles of their mother's father's
      shoes; three bottled scorpions; and one very yellow elephant's tusk,
      sent home from India by Great-uncle Edgar Forsyte, who had been in jute; a
      yellow bit of paper propped up, with spidery writing on it, recording God
      knew what! And the pictures crowding on the walls—all water-colours
      save those four Barbizons looking like the foreigners they were, and
      doubtful customers at that—pictures bright and illustrative, “Telling
      the Bees,” “Hey for the Ferry!” and two in the style of
      Frith, all thimblerig and crinolines, given them by Swithin. Oh! many,
      many pictures at which Soames had gazed a thousand times in supercilious
      fascination; a marvellous collection of bright, smooth gilt frames.
    </p>
<p>
      And the boudoir-grand piano, beautifully dusted, hermetically sealed as
      ever; and Aunt Juley's album of pressed seaweed on it. And the
      gilt-legged chairs, stronger than they looked. And on one side of the
      fireplace the sofa of crimson silk, where Aunt Ann, and after her Aunt
      Juley, had been wont to sit, facing the light and bolt upright. And on the
      other side of the fire the one really easy chair, back to the light, for
      Aunt Hester. Soames screwed up his eyes; he seemed to see them sitting
      there. Ah! and the atmosphere—even now, of too many stuffs and
      washed lace curtains, lavender in bags, and dried bees' wings.
      'No,' he thought, 'there's nothing like it left;
      it ought to be preserved.' And, by George, they might laugh at it,
      but for a standard of gentle life never departed from, for fastidiousness
      of skin and eye and nose and feeling, it beat to-day hollow—to-day
      with its Tubes and cars, its perpetual smoking, its cross-legged,
      bare-necked girls visible up to the knees and down to the waist if you
      took the trouble (agreeable to the satyr within each Forsyte but hardly
      his idea of a lady), with their feet, too, screwed round the legs of their
      chairs while they ate, and their “So longs,” and their “Old
      Beans,” and their laughter—girls who gave him the shudders
      whenever he thought of Fleur in contact with them; and the hard-eyed,
      capable, older women who managed life and gave him the shudders too. No!
      his old aunts, if they never opened their minds, their eyes, or very much
      their windows, at least had manners, and a standard, and reverence for
      past and future.
    </p>
<p>
      With rather a choky feeling he closed the door and went tiptoeing
      upstairs. He looked in at a place on the way: H'm! in perfect order
      of the eighties, with a sort of yellow oilskin paper on the walls. At the
      top of the stairs he hesitated between four doors. Which of them was
      Timothy's? And he listened. A sound, as of a child slowly dragging a
      hobby-horse about, came to his ears. That must be Timothy! He tapped, and
      a door was opened by Smither, very red in the face.
    </p>
<p>
      Mr. Timothy was taking his walk, and she had not been able to get him to
      attend. If Mr. Soames would come into the back-room, he could see him
      through the door.
    </p>
<p>
      Soames went into the back-room and stood watching.
    </p>
<p>
      The last of the old Forsytes was on his feet, moving with the most
      impressive slowness, and an air of perfect concentration on his own
      affairs, backward and forward between the foot of his bed and the window,
      a distance of some twelve feet. The lower part of his square face, no
      longer clean-shaven, was covered with snowy beard clipped as short as it
      could be, and his chin looked as broad as his brow where the hair was also
      quite white, while nose and cheeks and brow were a good yellow. One hand
      held a stout stick, and the other grasped the skirt of his Jaeger
      dressing-gown, from under which could be seen his bed-socked ankles and
      feet thrust into Jaeger slippers. The expression on his face was that of a
      crossed child, intent on something that he has not got. Each time he
      turned he stumped the stick, and then dragged it, as if to show that he
      could do without it:
    </p>
<p>
      “He still looks strong,” said Soames under his breath.
    </p>
<p>
      “Oh! yes, sir. You should see him take his bath—it's
      wonderful; he does enjoy it so.”
    </p>
<p>
      Those quite loud words gave Soames an insight. Timothy had resumed his
      babyhood.
    </p>
<p>
      “Does he take any interest in things generally?” he said, also
      loud.
    </p>
<p>
      “Oh! yes, sir; his food and his Will. It's quite a sight to
      see him turn it over and over, not to read it, of course; and every now
      and then he asks the price of Consols, and I write it on a slate for him—very
      large. Of course, I always write the same, what they were when he last
      took notice, in 1914. We got the doctor to forbid him to read the paper
      when the War broke out. Oh! he did take on about that at first. But he
      soon came round, because he knew it tired him; and he's a wonder to
      conserve energy as he used to call it when my dear mistresses were alive,
      bless their hearts! How he did go on at them about that; they were always
      so active, if you remember, Mr. Soames.”
    </p>
<p>
      “What would happen if I were to go in?” asked Soames: “Would
      he remember me? I made his Will, you know, after Miss Hester died in 1907.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Oh! that, sir,” replied Smither doubtfully, “I couldn't
      take on me to say. I think he might; he really is a wonderful man for his
      age.”
    </p>
<p>
      Soames moved into the doorway, and waiting for Timothy to turn, said in a
      loud voice: “Uncle Timothy!”
    </p>
<p>
      Timothy trailed back half-way, and halted.
    </p>
<p>
      “Eh?” he said.
    </p>
<p>
      “Soames,” cried Soames at the top of his voice, holding out
      his hand, “Soames Forsyte!”
    </p>
<p>
      “No!” said Timothy, and stumping his stick loudly on the
      floor, he continued his walk.
    </p>
<p>
      “It doesn't seem to work,” said Soames.
    </p>
<p>
      “No, sir,” replied Smither, rather crestfallen; “you
      see, he hasn't finished his walk. It always was one thing at a time
      with him. I expect he'll ask me this afternoon if you came about the
      gas, and a pretty job I shall have to make him understand.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Do you think he ought to have a man about him?”
    </p>
<p>
      Smither held up her hands. “A man! Oh! no. Cook and me can manage
      perfectly. A strange man about would send him crazy in no time. And my
      mistresses wouldn't like the idea of a man in the house. Besides, we're
      so—proud of him.”
    </p>
<p>
      “I suppose the doctor comes?”
    </p>
<p>
      “Every morning. He makes special terms for such a quantity, and Mr.
      Timothy's so used, he doesn't take a bit of notice, except to
      put out his tongue.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Well,” said Soames, turning away, “it's rather
      sad and painful to me.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Oh! sir,” returned Smither anxiously, “you mustn't
      think that. Now that he can't worry about things, he quite enjoys
      his life, really he does. As I say to Cook, Mr. Timothy is more of a man
      than he ever was. You see, when he's not walkin', or takin'
      his bath, he's eatin', and when he's not eatin',
      he's sleepin'. and there it is. There isn't an ache or a
      care about him anywhere.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Well,” said Soames, “there's something in that. I'll
      go down. By the way, let me see his Will.”
    </p>
<p>
      “I should have to take my time about that, sir; he keeps it under
      his pillow, and he'd see me, while he's active.”
    </p>
<p>
      “I only want to know if it's the one I made,” said
      Soames; “you take a look at its date some time, and let me know.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Yes, sir; but I'm sure it's the same, because me and
      Cook witnessed, you remember, and there's our names on it still, and
      we've only done it once.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Quite,” said Soames. He did remember. Smither and Jane had
      been proper witnesses, having been left nothing in the Will that they
      might have no interest in Timothy's death. It had been—he
      fully admitted—an almost improper precaution, but Timothy had wished
      it, and, after all, Aunt Hester had provided for them amply.
    </p>
<p>
      “Very well,” he said; “good-bye, Smither. Look after
      him, and if he should say anything at any time, put it down, and let me
      know.”
    </p>
<p>
      “Oh! yes, Mr. Soames; I'll be sure to do that. It's been
      such a pleasant change to see you. Cook will be quite excited when I tell
      her.”
    </p>
<p>
      Soames shook her hand and went down-stairs. He stood for fully two minutes
      by the hat-stand whereon he had hung his hat so many times. 'So it
      all passes,' he was thinking; 'passes and begins again. Poor
      old chap!' And he listened, if perchance the sound of Timothy
      trailing his hobby-horse might come down the well of the stairs; or some
      ghost of an old face show over the bannisters, and an old voice say:
      'Why, it's dear Soames, and we were only saying that we hadn't
      seen him for a week!'
    </p>
<p>
      Nothing—nothing! Just the scent of camphor, and dust-motes in a
      sunbeam through the fanlight over the door. The little old house! A
      mausoleum! And, turning on his heel, he went out, and caught his train.
    </p>
<p>
<a id="link2H_4_0101" name="link2H_4_0101">
<!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
</p>
<div style="height: 4em;">
<br/><br/><br/><br/>
</div>
		</section>
	</section>
	</body>
	</html>
