<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="interlude-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="interlude-1-4" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h3>
				<p>He woke at half-past two, an hour which long experience had taught him brings panic intensity to all awkward thoughts. Experience had also taught him that a further waking at the proper hour of eight showed the folly of such panic. On this particular morning the thought which gathered rapid momentum was that if he became ill, at his age not improbable, he would not see her. From this it was but a step to realisation that he would be cut off, too, when his son and June returned from Spain. How could he justify desire for the company of one who had stolen⁠—early morning does not mince words⁠—June’s lover? That lover was dead; but June was a stubborn little thing; warmhearted, but stubborn as wood, and⁠—quite true⁠—not one who forgot! By the middle of next month they would be back. He had barely five weeks left to enjoy the new interest which had come into what remained of his life. Darkness showed up to him absurdly clear the nature of his feeling. Admiration for beauty⁠—a craving to see that which delighted his eyes.</p>
				<p>Preposterous, at his age! And yet⁠—what other reason was there for asking June to undergo such painful reminder, and how prevent his son and his son’s wife from thinking him very queer? He would be reduced to sneaking up to London, which tired him; and the least indisposition would cut him off even from that. He lay with eyes open, setting his jaw against the prospect, and calling himself an old fool, while his heart beat loudly, and then seemed to stop beating altogether. He had seen the dawn lighting the window chinks, heard the birds chirp and twitter, and the cocks crow, before he fell asleep again, and awoke tired but sane. Five weeks before he need bother, at his age an eternity! But that early morning panic had left its mark, had slightly fevered the will of one who had always had his own way. He would see her as often as he wished! Why not go up to town and make that codicil at his solicitor’s instead of writing about it; she might like to go to the opera! But, by train, for he would not have that fat chap Beacon grinning behind his back. Servants were such fools; and, as likely as not, they had known all the past history of Irene and young Bosinney⁠—servants knew everything, and suspected the rest. He wrote to her that morning:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p>“<span epub:type="z3998:salutation">My Dear Irene</span>⁠—I have to be up in town tomorrow. If you would like to have a look in at the opera, come and dine with me quietly. …”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>But where? It was decades since he had dined anywhere in London save at his Club or at a private house. Ah! that newfangled place close to Covent Garden. …</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p>“Let me have a line tomorrow morning to the Piedmont Hotel whether to expect you there at 7 o’clock.</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">“Yours affectionately,</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:signature">“Jolyon Forsyte.”</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<p>She would understand that he just wanted to give her a little pleasure; for the idea that she should guess he had this itch to see her was instinctively unpleasant to him; it was not seemly that one so old should go out of his way to see beauty, especially in a woman.</p>
				<p>The journey next day, short though it was, and the visit to his lawyer’s, tired him. It was hot too, and after dressing for dinner he lay down on the sofa in his bedroom to rest a little. He must have had a sort of fainting fit, for he came to himself feeling very queer; and with some difficulty rose and rang the bell. Why! it was past seven! And there he was and she would be waiting. But suddenly the dizziness came on again, and he was obliged to relapse on the sofa. He heard the maid’s voice say:</p>
				<p>“Did you ring, sir?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, come here”; he could not see her clearly, for the cloud in front of his eyes. “I’m not well, I want some sal volatile.”</p>
				<p>“Yes, sir.” Her voice sounded frightened.</p>
				<p>Old Jolyon made an effort.</p>
				<p>“Don’t go. Take this message to my niece⁠—a lady waiting in the hall⁠—a lady in grey. Say <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Forsyte is not well⁠—the heat. He is very sorry; if he is not down directly, she is not to wait dinner.”</p>
				<p>When she was gone, he thought feebly: “Why did I say a lady in grey⁠—she may be in anything. Sal volatile!” He did not go off again, yet was not conscious of how Irene came to be standing beside him, holding smelling salts to his nose, and pushing a pillow up behind his head. He heard her say anxiously: “Dear Uncle Jolyon, what is it?” was dimly conscious of the soft pressure of her lips on his hand; then drew a long breath of smelling salts, suddenly discovered strength in them, and sneezed.</p>
				<p>“Ha!” he said, “it’s nothing. How did you get here? Go down and dine⁠—the tickets are on the dressing-table. I shall be all right in a minute.”</p>
				<p>He felt her cool hand on his forehead, smelled violets, and sat divided between a sort of pleasure and a determination to be all right.</p>
				<p>“Why! You <em>are</em> in grey!” he said. “Help me up.” Once on his feet he gave himself a shake.</p>
				<p>“What business had I to go off like that!” And he moved very slowly to the glass. What a cadaverous chap! Her voice, behind him, murmured:</p>
				<p>“You mustn’t come down, Uncle; you must rest.”</p>
				<p>“Fiddlesticks! A glass of champagne’ll soon set me to rights. I can’t have you missing the opera.”</p>
				<p>But the journey down the corridor was troublesome. What carpets they had in these newfangled places, so thick that you tripped up in them at every step! In the lift he noticed how concerned she looked, and said with the ghost of a twinkle:</p>
				<p>“I’m a pretty host.”</p>
				<p>When the lift stopped he had to hold firmly to the seat to prevent its slipping under him; but after soup and a glass of champagne he felt much better, and began to enjoy an infirmity which had brought such solicitude into her manner towards him.</p>
				<p>“I should have liked you for a daughter,” he said suddenly; and watching the smile in her eyes, went on:</p>
				<p>“You mustn’t get wrapped up in the past at your time of life; plenty of that when you get to my age. That’s a nice dress⁠—I like the style.”</p>
				<p>“I made it myself.”</p>
				<p>Ah! A woman who could make herself a pretty frock had not lost her interest in life.</p>
				<p>“Make hay while the sun shines,” he said; “and drink that up. I want to see some colour in your cheeks. We mustn’t waste life; it doesn’t do. There’s a new Marguerite tonight; let’s hope she won’t be fat. And Mephisto⁠—anything more dreadful than a fat chap playing the Devil I can’t imagine.”</p>
				<p>But they did not go to the opera after all, for in getting up from dinner the dizziness came over him again, and she insisted on his staying quiet and going to bed early. When he parted from her at the door of the hotel, having paid the cabman to drive her to Chelsea, he sat down again for a moment to enjoy the memory of her words: “You <em>are</em> such a darling to me, Uncle Jolyon!” Why! Who wouldn’t be! He would have liked to stay up another day and take her to the Zoo, but two days running of him would bore her to death. No, he must wait till next Sunday; she had promised to come then. They would settle those lessons for Holly, if only for a month. It would be something. That little Mam’zelle Beauce wouldn’t like it, but she would have to lump it. And crushing his old opera hat against his chest he sought the lift.</p>
				<p>He drove to Waterloo next morning, struggling with a desire to say: “Drive me to Chelsea.” But his sense of proportion was too strong. Besides, he still felt shaky, and did not want to risk another aberration like that of last night, away from home. Holly, too, was expecting him, and what he had in his bag for her. Not that there was any cupboard love in his little sweet⁠—she was a bundle of affection. Then, with the rather bitter cynicism of the old, he wondered for a second whether it was not cupboard love which made Irene put up with him. No, she was not that sort either. She had, if anything, too little notion of how to butter her bread, no sense of property, poor thing! Besides, he had not breathed a word about that codicil, nor should he⁠—sufficient unto the day was the good thereof.</p>
				<p>In the victoria which met him at the station Holly was restraining the dog Balthasar, and their caresses made “jubey” his drive home. All the rest of that fine hot day and most of the next he was content and peaceful, reposing in the shade, while the long lingering sunshine showered gold on the lawns and the flowers. But on Thursday evening at his lonely dinner he began to count the hours; sixty-five till he would go down to meet her again in the little coppice, and walk up through the fields at her side. He had intended to consult the doctor about his fainting fit, but the fellow would be sure to insist on quiet, no excitement and all that; and he did not mean to be tied by the leg, did not want to be told of an infirmity⁠—if there were one, could not afford to hear of it at his time of life, now that this new interest had come. And he carefully avoided making any mention of it in a letter to his son. It would only bring them back with a run! How far this silence was due to consideration for their pleasure, how far to regard for his own, he did not pause to consider.</p>
				<p>That night in his study he had just finished his cigar and was dozing off, when he heard the rustle of a gown, and was conscious of a scent of violets. Opening his eyes he saw her, dressed in grey, standing by the fireplace, holding out her arms. The odd thing was that, though those arms seemed to hold nothing, they were curved as if round someone’s neck, and her own neck was bent back, her lips open, her eyes closed. She vanished at once, and there were the mantelpiece and his bronzes. But those bronzes and the mantelpiece had not been there when she was, only the fireplace and the wall! Shaken and troubled, he got up. “I must take medicine,” he thought; “I can’t be well.” His heart beat too fast, he had an asthmatic feeling in the chest; and going to the window, he opened it to get some air. A dog was barking far away, one of the dogs at Gage’s farm no doubt, beyond the coppice. A beautiful still night, but dark. “I dropped off,” he mused, “that’s it! And yet I’ll swear my eyes were open!” A sound like a sigh seemed to answer.</p>
				<p>“What’s that?” he said sharply, “who’s there?”</p>
				<p>Putting his hand to his side to still the beating of his heart, he stepped out on the terrace. Something soft scurried by in the dark. “Shoo!” It was that great grey cat. “Young Bosinney was like a great cat!” he thought. “It was him in there, that she⁠—that she was⁠—He’s got her still!” He walked to the edge of the terrace, and looked down into the darkness; he could just see the powdering of the daisies on the unmown lawn. Here today and gone tomorrow! And there came the moon, who saw all, young and old, alive and dead, and didn’t care a dump! His own turn soon. For a single day of youth he would give what was left! And he turned again towards the house. He could see the windows of the night nursery up there. His little sweet would be asleep. “Hope that dog won’t wake her!” he thought. “What is it makes us love, and makes us die! I must go to bed.”</p>
				<p>And across the terrace stones, growing grey in the moonlight, he passed back within.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
